{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl {\f0 Times New Roman;} {\f1 Arial;}}
\widowctrl
\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
\fs24
\pard\qc\b\fs36 TEACHER JOB PORTAL\par
\pard\qc\b0\fs24 Project Synopsis\par
\pard\qc Version 1.0 | Date: October 2, 2025\par
\pard\qc Prepared By: <Your Name / Team>\par
\pard\sa300\par
\pard\b 1. Abstract\b0\par
The Teacher Job Portal is a centralized, domain-specific recruitment and talent management web platform designed for schools, colleges, training institutes, and freelance educators. It enables institutions to publish structured vacancies and manage candidate lifecycles while empowering teachers to showcase comprehensive professional profiles and apply efficiently. Core capabilities include job posting and moderation, advanced filtering, multilingual interface (Indian languages), secure document handling, application status tracking, notifications, dashboards, and a scalable architecture prepared for AI-driven matching. Emphasis is placed on usability, transparency, performance, security, and future extensibility.\par
\par
\b 2. Problem Statement\b0\par
Educational hiring is often fragmented across emails, spreadsheets, and generic job portals. Consequences include: (a) high administrative overhead, (b) unstructured and inconsistent candidate data, (c) poor subject-specialization matching, (d) slow feedback cycles, (e) limited analytics, and (f) lack of fair visibility for qualified educators. A focused platform tailored to educator hiring alleviates these inefficiencies and improves placement quality and speed.\par
\par
\b 3. Objectives\b0\par
\i Functional Objectives:\i0\par
\tab - Structured teacher profiles (subjects, boards, qualifications, experience, certifications).\par
\tab - Institution registration, job lifecycle (create, edit, archive).\par
\tab - Intelligent search & filters (subject, location, experience, salary band, job type, board affiliation).\par
\tab - Application submission with resume and supporting documents.\par
\tab - Status tracking (Received, Shortlisted, Interview Scheduled, Offered, Rejected, Hired).\par
\tab - Real-time or near-real-time notifications (email / in-app).\par
\tab - Analytics dashboards (funnel metrics, time-to-fill, offer acceptance).\par
\tab - Admin oversight (user governance, moderation, audit trail).\par
\i Non-Functional Objectives:\i0\par
\tab - Availability ≥ 99%.\par
\tab - Page response < 2 seconds (p50) under baseline load.\par
\tab - Secure storage & transmission (TLS, hashed credentials).\par
\tab - Horizontal scalability for seasonal spikes.\par
\tab - WCAG 2.1 AA accessibility baseline.\par
\tab - Internationalization-ready architecture.\par
\par
\b 4. Scope\b0\par
In-Scope (Phase 1): Responsive web UI, teacher and institution roles, job posting & browsing, profile management, application submission, status workflow, notifications, basic dashboards, audit logs, document uploads, localization base layer, multi-language content strings, basic recommendation heuristics.\par
Out-of-Scope (Initial Release): Native mobile apps, deep AI semantic matching, payroll/onboarding modules, background check integrations, payment gateways, LMS or HRIS integration, full-text semantic resume parsing, advanced calendar scheduling.\par
Assumptions: Stable internet connectivity, valid contact information, institutional authenticity verification handled manually in first iteration.\par
Constraints: Budget/time-box, compliance with regional data privacy, language translation accuracy dependent on contributors.\par
\par
\b 5. Stakeholders\b0\par
Primary: Teachers (candidates), Institution recruiters/HR, System administrators.\par
Secondary: Academic coordinators, regulatory reviewers (read-only), future integration partners (API consumers).\par
\par
\b 6. System Overview\b0\par
The platform comprises a React (Vite) frontend consuming a RESTful Node.js/Express backend. Data persistence uses an SQL database (initially SQLite, migration path to PostgreSQL). Modules include: Authentication & Authorization, Profile Management, Job Management, Search & Filtering, Applications & Status Tracking, Notifications, Analytics, and Administration. Internationalization (i18n) supports multiple Indian languages. Architecture enforces separation of concerns with modular route controllers and service layers.\par
\par
\b 7. Existing Challenges\b0\par
Prior fragmented processes lead to: manual duplication, inconsistent candidate evaluation criteria, poor tracking of funnel effectiveness, delayed decisions, limited long-term talent pooling, and minimal data-driven insights.\par
\par
\b 8. Proposed Solution Benefits\b0\par
Centralization, structured metadata, faster screening, transparent status visibility, analytics for optimization, security controls, extensible plugin-like future integration, and prepared AI augmentation layer.\par
\par
\b 9. Functional Requirements (Representative)\b0\par
FR1: User registration with email verification.\par
FR2: Teacher profile creation (mandatory: name, email, location, subjects, experience).\par
FR3: Institution job posting with validation (title, description, subject requirements, experience, salary range).\par
FR4: Job search with multi-criteria filtering.\par
FR5: Application submission (resume + cover letter + optional video link).\par
FR6: Application status transitions logged with timestamps.\par
FR7: Notifications on status change (in-app + queued email).\par
FR8: Admin moderation of postings and account suspension.\par
FR9: Dashboard metrics (open roles, applicant counts per stage, time-to-fill).\par
FR10: Export applicants (CSV).\par
FR11: Secure document upload (type/size validation, virus scan placeholder).\par
FR12: Audit logging of critical actions (auth events, status transitions).\par
\par
\b 10. Non-Functional Requirements\b0\par
Performance: Support 1000 concurrent sessions baseline.\par
Security: OWASP Top 10 mitigations, password hashing (Bcrypt/Argon2), role-based access control (RBAC), token revocation strategy.\par
Reliability: Daily backups; RPO ≤ 24h; RTO ≤ 4h.\par
Maintainability: Layered architecture, linting, code style enforcement, modular services.\par
Scalability: Stateless API nodes behind load balancer; CDN for static assets; distinct media storage.\par
Accessibility: Semantic HTML, ARIA mapping, color contrast, keyboard navigation.\par
Logging & Monitoring: Central aggregated logs with alert thresholds (error rate > 2%).\par
Internationalization: Lazy-loaded locale bundles, pluralization support.\par
\par
\b 11. Architecture (Conceptual Layers)\b0\par
Presentation Layer (React) -> API Layer (Express REST) -> Service Layer (Business logic) -> Data Layer (SQL DB + caching) -> External Services (Email, Storage, Future Queue).\par
Data Flow Example (Application Submission): Teacher -> UI -> API (validation) -> DB (Applications + StatusHistory) -> Notification queue (future) -> Email dispatch -> UI acknowledgment.\par
\par
\b 12. Technology Stack (Planned / Current)\b0\par
Frontend: React, Vite, Context API, i18n framework.\par
Backend: Node.js (Express), modular routing, middleware pipeline.\par
Database: SQLite (development) -> PostgreSQL (scaling).\par
Cache (Future): Redis.\par
Queue (Future): RabbitMQ or AWS SQS.\par
Auth: JWT Access + Refresh tokens, password hashing.\par
Storage: Object storage (S3 / equivalent) for documents.\par
CI/CD (Planned): GitHub Actions.\par
Testing: Jest (unit), Supertest (API), Cypress (E2E).\par
Deployment: Containerized (Docker) or managed platform (App Service / ECS).\par
\par
\b 13. Database Design (Core Entities)\b0\par
Teachers(id, name, email, password_hash, location, experience_years, subjects[], qualifications, certifications, bio, created_at).\par
Institutions(id, name, email, address, type, accreditation_code, contact_person, created_at).\par
Jobs(id, institution_id, title, description, subjects_required[], min_experience, qualifications_required, salary_min, salary_max, contract_type, location, status, posted_at, expires_at).\par
Applications(id, job_id, teacher_id, status, cover_letter, resume_path, video_link, applied_at, updated_at).\par
StatusHistory(id, application_id, old_status, new_status, changed_at, changed_by).\par
Notifications(id, user_id, type, payload_json, is_read, created_at).\par
AuditLogs(id, actor_id, entity_type, entity_id, action, meta_json, created_at).\par
Indexes on (subjects, location, status, composite(job_id,status)).\par
\par
\b 14. UML & Diagrams (Descriptive)\b0\par
Use Cases: Post Job, Apply to Job, Update Status, View Dashboard, Moderate Account.\par
Sequence (Apply): Actor -> UI -> API -> Validation -> Persist -> Queue -> Email -> Response.\par
Class Model: User (abstract), Teacher(User), Institution(User), Job, Application, StatusHistory, Notification, AuditLog.\par
\par
\b 15. Data Flow Diagram (Narrative)\b0\par
Level 0: Users interact with Portal; Portal reads/writes DB; triggers notification channel.\par
Level 1 (Status Update): Recruiter -> API -> Update Application.status -> Insert StatusHistory -> Create Notification -> Deliver.\par
\par
\b 16. Security Considerations\b0\par
Input validation, output encoding, strict CSP (future), rate limiting on auth endpoints, account lockout after repeated failures, secure cookie flags, token rotation, least privilege DB roles, audit review triggers for unusual activity.\par
\par
\b 17. Testing Strategy\b0\par
Unit: Service logic & validators.\par
Integration: Auth + Job posting + Application pipeline.\par
E2E: Candidate journey (register -> apply), Recruiter journey (post -> review -> update status).\par
Performance: k6/JMeter baseline load test.\par
Security: Dependency scanning, static analysis, minimal dynamic scan.\par
UAT: Stakeholder walkthrough scripts.\par
\par
\b 18. Implementation Plan (Phased)\b0\par
Phase 1 (Weeks 1-3): Core auth, teacher profiles, institution onboarding.\par
Phase 2 (Weeks 4-6): Job posting, search filters, listing UI.\par
Phase 3 (Weeks 7-9): Applications, status transitions, notifications.\par
Phase 4 (Weeks 10-12): Dashboards, analytics, audit logs.\par
Phase 5 (Weeks 13-14): Hardening (security, performance, accessibility).\par
Phase 6 (Week 15): UAT, documentation, deployment readiness.\par
Phase 7 (Post): Monitoring & iterative enhancements.\par
\par
\b 19. Risk Analysis & Mitigation\b0\par
Technical: Query performance (Mitigate by indexing, caching).\par
Security: Credential compromise (Mitigate by hashing, MFA future).\par
Adoption: Low recruiter engagement (Mitigate with guided onboarding, metrics).\par
Regulatory: Data retention (Mitigate configurable purge jobs).\par
Operational: Third-party email outages (Mitigate fallback provider).\par
\par
\b 20. Future Enhancements\b0\par
AI-based match scoring, automated resume parsing, in-platform scheduling & calendar sync, video interview integration, endorsement gamification, mobile apps, exposure weighting by performance analytics, API partner ecosystem.\par
\par
\b 21. Maintenance & Monitoring Strategy\b0\par
Health endpoints, structured logging, metrics (latency, error %, queue depth), automated backups, dependency scanning schedule, quarterly disaster recovery drills, SLA review.\par
\par
\b 22. Conclusion\b0\par
This Teacher Job Portal lays a robust, modular foundation for transforming educator recruitment. It reduces friction, enhances quality and speed of placements, and provides a scalable base for analytics and AI augmentation. Phased delivery ensures early value while preserving a clean growth trajectory for advanced capabilities.\par
\par
\b 23. References\b0\par
OWASP Secure Coding Guidelines; WCAG 2.1; PostgreSQL Documentation; ISO 27001 (conceptual alignment); REST and JWT best practices.\par
\par
\b Appendix Placeholders\b0\par
A. ER Diagram\par
B. Use Case Diagram\par
C. Sequence Diagram (Application Flow)\par
D. Sample Wireframes (Landing, Job Detail, Application Form, Dashboard)\par
\par
\pard\qc --- End of Document ---\par
}
